---
title: "The Disconnect Between the Realities of Environmental, Social, and Governance"
description: "Actionable and measurable impact is not so easy to discern."
date: 2025-09-19T10:00:00-07:00
tags:
 - phd-journey
 - research
 - thoughts
---

> An ongoing publishing of the papers, memo's, and explorations I wrote in various Doctoral and PhD Seminars between 2021 and 2024. This memo dates from October 2022.

The bay rolled slowly in the crisp morning air, the sun beaming and bouncing off the tips tiny waves offering shimmering specular highlights as if glitter had dusted the surface in the silence of night. The sudden snap of wire cracked the air, the crash of orange and yellow drums from the ship deck breaking the illusion, the dirty rainbow of color across the waters surface soon overtaken by an unsettling black ooze. Indeterminable shouting rained down from shiphands high on the ship deck above while the corporate representative that had hired me to evaluate the operations of their organization professed, “We have an amazing environmental record, you won’t need to focus on that.”

I offered no verbal response, though my blank stare and slow turn to the chaotic environmental travesty happening in real time behind us offered a desirable yelling in its own specific way that did not go unnoticed.

“I did say amazing, not perfect,” the representative retorted.

The disconnect between the realities of environmental, social, and governance (ESG) permeates a diacotamy that is both measurable—the cracked carcasses of barrels and their gallons of hazardous materials pouring into a bay—and inconceivable—the very damage in the complex ecosystem that such a hazardous material promotes. While the above story of my own isolated experience offers an all-too relatable if depressing story that would find its way onto the likes 11 o’clock news and then soon relegated to celebrity activism on Page 6, the story portends the corporate and investment world's view on ESG that is related in the pieces in HBR and SSIR. More specifically, let’s take a look at three primary areas that create a similar diacotamy within the two pieces: the differing approaches to elicit impact in organization, the struggle to reconcile the gauges of measurement, and the where that leaves the goal of ESG.

It’s helpful to note that while both articles take different approaches to ESG their resultant aim is the same: actionable and measurable impact. The word impact is a loaded term however; when not fitted with context not all impact is created equal. In the HBR article, this takes the form of acknowledging the various players and stakeholders—companies, investors, and shareholders—but focusing on what businesses must do to not only measure but really extend their purpose beyond profit maximization at all costs. In contrast, the SSIR article has a more fixed view on the nature of signaling to investors what is an impactful organization or in more grand terms, ESG funds or instruments that promote the impact investors seek. While both articles differ in their approach to the problems of ESG and the actors involved, their main arguments are really the same: we have inadequate approaches to measuring impact and need better ways to signal the bonfidities of ESG in action as opposed to the subjective yet entirely too concise measures that have little basis on reality.

The struggle around measurement between the two articles presents itself as the where and the how of measurement. The HBR article focuses on the business context, denoting that the classic fixation on one small part of a complex system fundamentally creates solutions to the wrong problem; that top-down mandates create side effects that offer little more than loopholes and escape hatches that on a good day are shady and on bad days downright deceitful. The gap in existing measures—presumption of causality, monetization over value, ignoring the larger system—drives the articles’ theme of action with measures by approaching systems as something to be studied and that action can only come for expanding curiosity and boundary spanning beyond the organizational border. The struggle of measurement is extended beyond the business context into the nature of investors within the SSIR article but has similar undertones. The presumption of causality when it comes to a positive relationship between ESG and financial performance draws ire from multiple angles but pivots hard to denote the very measurement used—ESG ratings system—is such a low bar as to make the relationship largely meaningless. This rating system has such tremendous variability within its constructs for weighted measures that the focus on outcomes makes the composite scores meaningless in real terms of detrimental impact to the environment or society as whole. While this seems vastly different from the HBR articles approach, I contend it is little more than a spin on the measuring signals concept while missing the entirety of the process. In both articles, the measure of ESG regardless of input, outcome, or precision is mucked; it is weighted towards the scales of maximizing profit for shareholders and the stoked fears other stakeholders are left to the wayside.

The harsh reality is that a comparable ESG measure doesn’t guarantee societal impact nor is wanted by those claiming their ESG victories in many cases. The ESG story is the only data point, the context lost to the weight on the scale tipped to improve corporate profits, be it business, investment fund, or shareholder. The “current focus on ESG measurement is dangerously narrow” (HBR) and the “system as it stands gives a pass to a large number of harmful actors” (SSIR) could have been lines from the same article; the vast complexity of the measure of ESG lost not to either article but lost to those who desperately seek to turn awareness of a warming and warring world into action. No measure we have today makes these choices easier for either business executives making decisions nor the investors who seek actionable ESG impact and returns. Instead we are left to declare that current ESG measures “dangerously misrepresent broader values” (HBR) and that “an entirely new ratings system is required” (SSIR).

Both articles in this regard fail in my eyes. The SSIR claims of shifting the measuring to “economic, human, and environmental costs of market failures” is a pipe dream given the complexity of the systems it seeks to understand. Finding a third party that is directly harmed is likely not terribly hard to do; finding which business—or in many cases of raw material pipelines, businesses—is responsible is another matter entirely. While the HBR article denotes a need for measurement to aid in course correction, its primary emphasis on doing and learning that drives impact leaves me in a nebulous fog; the question of measuring such doing is left unanswered, instead left to a ghostly “purpose” that may or may not emerge and somehow must be conveyed and explored. I find this its own pipe dream, regardless of the “potentially complementary” aspect to existing measures when the measures are largely broken apart in the first part of the article. My frustration is also somewhat a key insight: we are much more terrible at determining what even a foundational ESG measure is or means with respect to any stakeholder within the sphere of large scale corporations. Somehow even with my varied experience prior to reading both articles I did not actually put this together, which I believe is also how persuasive the want of acceptable measures for ESG is to make impact. We want these measures because it drives action by the nature of cultures available within corporations that lean into data-driven policy, product, and market decisions and they instead to a large extent miss both the point and the impact we seek.

Reading these articles was a useful reminder of how much I assumed in years prior that the measure of such outcomes or process impacts were good enough. In fact, I now look back in those moments and realize I fell prey to the same complaints I just made about those articles, that even when you can identify the complexity and realize the measures aren’t working, the subsequent measures you define anew will often be laden with their own assumptions and pitfalls, the complexity and lacking separation of concerns creating gaps in both action and understanding. I am not terribly surprised per say on certain aspects of the articles; the sacrifice on profits that the SSIR article mentions I had similarly written about in the mid-2000’s as an idea around local community impacts for organizations—e.g. the societal impacts of shareholder demands on company-driven towns outside of the larger ESG movement—but it was surprising to see that investment vehicles are such an ESG detriment and that the measure has been skewed in such a depressing direction. Similarly, to see the “broader systems/perspective” zoom out show up in the HBR article feels almost like a vinyl reissue of the old globalization argument that was fairly prevalent in a lot of economic circles I was in during the late 1990’s. It’s surprising—ironic?—that this view of broad boundary spanning that organizations now need to attempt to act like a better ESG citizen to be that target of the investment is literally the same boundary spanning across organizational and country borders that they did to create their expansive profits; the side effect being “environmental devastation and inequality” as the SSIR points out.

I struggle with that realization. Hindsight is 20/20 I suppose; I attempt now to rationalize my own actions or defined measures that I tried with many organizations over the years and I can say “it was the best information I had on hand” but that feels shallow, a cop out, and dodge at this moment. I didn’t expect the articles to surface that old memory I opened with. I didn’t expect the articles to create such a reflection. It’s both appreciated and haunting all at once.