---
title: "Reflecting on Complexity Theory and my Problem of Practice"
description: "Random phone calls aside, I think we're getting somewhere."
date: 2025-08-28T10:00:00-07:00
tags:
 - phd-journey
 - research
 - thoughts
---

> An ongoing publishing of the papers, memo's, and explorations I wrote in various Doctoral and PhD Seminars between 2021 and 2024. This memo dates from April 2022.

From our first meeting, a nagging thought had begun to form in my head. Had I approached my problem of practice—software development teams often caught between dueling directives from executives who deem innovation a top priority and team managers who have tasks that take precedence over innovation—with too narrow a lens? Was the pond I was about to begin fishing simply too shallow to bear any fish at all?

My problem of practice was surely much larger than a dueling conflict between two parties’ given positions, but the further class proceeded the more I started to wonder if my hubris to isolate and reduce the problem into a study I had simply gone too far. As I wrote in the first attempt at applying complexity theory to my problem of practice, the parallels to complex adaptive systems—the ability to self-organize as a result of non-linear interactions, not at the behest of the individual seeking out a specific order (Houchin & MacLean, 2005)—are nearly in the original agile definition as defined by Beck et al. Yet as the class continued, I started to ponder the system less within the concept of the self-organization principle, but around another foundational point in my recent revision of my literature review the nature of leadership.

Specifically, I begin to ponder if my problem of practice is a tame problem as Rittell and Webber described, a puzzle of problem solving that was more likely associated with management rather than leadership. Surely the issue of task orientation at a management level has the undertones of transactional leadership but nary the term leadership does not make a leader—though I suppose it does make a conceptual framework if you’re the one building toward a theory. Jest aside, I was buoyed by Grint’s suggestion that what counts within the rational connection between problem and leadership style is persuasive rendition of the context and display of the appropriate authority style and that the one skill that is common between those authority types is reframing the context of the problem (Grint, 2010: 4). Maybe my current framing wasn’t so bad; maybe I was simply attempting to ask the right questions and to collaborate within the context of not just my problem of practice, but also this class and others I was in. Certainly there was a great deal of uncertainty within my my problem—having just started my data collection through my interview, I can already tell I have no idea what will emerge in terms of not only leadership but the very foundational elements of the problem itself—and that I should continue to engage towards more collaborative academic conversation as a means to help reconcile things that maybe don’t make the most sense in the moment.

What I’m saying Dave is don’t be shocked when I call you randomly at junctions in the summer to discuss “is that a case of self-organization bottom-up or does this sound like top-down management?”

I can honestly say I struggle now with decoupling complexity theory from the various facets of my research with every paper we’ve read. The nature of interconnectedness and interdependence of elements and the nature to not over-simplify the system obviously rocks me to my core—hence the last page I wrote. The nature of feedback loops or processes—system dynamics as it were—which have amplifying and dampening effects, loom larger on my mind as I start to wonder if such discoveries will emerge in my interviews and what effect they’ll have on my approach. Emergence itself, especially within the concept of the sensemaking papers we’ve just read, begins spinning my mind on what emergent patterns might be perceived but that I will not be able to adequately predict as part of my problem of practice. Yet, there is a bit of joy that such a discovery would at the very least verify that my problem of practice is not tame, but rather wicked indeed, that as Rittel and Webber noted, there is not a stopping rule and there is no class that fits all members, that we can’t be certain that one problems particulars override the commonalities of other problems we may have dealt with (Rittel & Webber, 1973).

This has sort of reared up and kicked me so to speak in the first interview I completed. Within moments of starting that interview, I realized I had run squarely into what Klieb et al described within their agent-model of complex adaptive systems that agents do what they perceive as best for them to fulfill their needs while taking into account the costs (Klieb, Rhoades, & McKelvey, 2014: 8). The person I was interviewing was describing “surviving” a novel discovery and sharing that innovation with others, about the necessity to weigh their options before other leaders. The discovery put them outside their own leadership class, that they now no longer fit among their peer group and with that, they found themselves fearful of the innovation and its acceptance. While they were uncertain of the novel discovery’s acceptance they nonetheless embraced the learning, and specifically noted the nature of co-learning with their team regardless of the higher sharing outcome—which I took to mean co-evolution.

This isn’t to say I don’t stand by my original thoughts in my previous iteration of reflecting on my problem of practice. I still very much think that leaders who encourage novel discovery—innovation over innovating—can help facilitate conversations with people in new and different ways, creating connections and unpredictable outcomes (Ramalingam & Jones, 2008). But that first interview…it has me more uncertain as to what will emerge, which is exciting but also generally terrifying. I had written previously that knowledge transfer and sharing through networks, agility creating instability that leads to transformation, the capacity for learning, the effects of simple rules all largely interconnect with not only my existing reading but really my own experience, and no one interview into this research I find myself not so much shocked that complexity theory popped in, but that it was so seemingly blatant.

More interviews and coding will tell the tale of course—I’ll have completed two more interview by the time you read this—so if I come into class on Saturday this coming week with a shocked look on my face, you’ll know why.

## References
Grint, K. 2010. Wicked Problems and Clumsy Solutions: The Role of Leadership. In S. Brookes & K. Grint (Eds.), The New Public Leadership Challenge: 169–186. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.

Klieb, L., Rhoades, M., & McKelvey, B. 2014. Towards a More Rigorous Foundation of Complex Adaptive Systems in Management Science: Dealing with Misnomers and Metaphors, 8.

Rittel, H. W. J., & Webber, M. M. 1973. Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sciences, 4(2): 155–169.