---
title: "Commonalities and Concepts of Design"
description: "Diving into Simon, Rittel and Moholy-Nagy and the operation of the mind."
date: 2025-08-22T10:00:00-07:00
tags:
 - phd-journey
 - research
 - thoughts
---

> An ongoing publishing of the papers, memo's, and explorations I wrote in various Doctoral and PhD Seminars between 2021 and 2024. This memo dates from January 2023.

Commonalities. The word usage, found in Simon and Rittel pieces respectively and alluded to in the language of Moholy-Nagy’s usage of potentialities, I find a curious strategic choice. Each paper uses that word to set the context of design within not the existing literature but within a wider conceptual frame under a specific unit of analysis. Such language would lead me to believe that the commonalities across these papers around the high level concept of design might lack. Fundamentally, what is the problem these papers attempt to address that is a common feature of design?

The very problem of attempting to speak on the concept of design is tied to the complexity of the unit of study. Moholy-Nagy’s problem of design is rooted in “novelty propaganda” (p90) or “[people’s] limited knowledge and practice, his ability to reason and grasp” (p82). This problem is about not serving the real or practical needs of people or the world around us. Rather, Moholy-Nagy’s view is one of teaching of the fundamentals, that design follows a natural order, driven by the natural world and our changing understanding of its properties and possibilities. Only through embracing the fundamentals, understanding the old ways, and embracing the new methods and properties we now understand can we deliver on overcoming that design problem.

Rittel’s approach by studying the operations of the mind is in my opinion not far removed from Moholy-Nagy, but the unit of analysis shifts. Moholy-Nagy was concerned with the fundamental nature and methods of design; Rittel looks at it through the nature of how a designer would operate on their knowledge in their own mind and make choices. Given the diversity of objects and human experiences it is justifiable to speak in general terms (p1), and that the studying of designers and their ability to reason is the only way to attempt to understand the problem of design. Reasoning becomes the solution to the problems of design; an ongoing argument inside the designers mind around what even is the problem to be solved, and epistemic freedom to make choices that at times appear to bear no sufficient reason for being, while strongly informed by the very environments—personal, professional, communal—that said designer operates within.

Put more simply, I contend that if Moholy-Nagy would say “the material cannot be bent to this shape”, Rittel would reply with “I choose to not be constrained by such a material”. Neither are incorrect, simply a different strategic frame and approach for the practicing designer.

At an even lower level of foundational scientific inquiry, Simon proposes that to “design is to gather information about what follows from what one has proposed or assumed” (p247). While Moholy-Nagy may say we must understand the fundamentals of nature, and Rittel might say we rationality make choices, Simon is saying our own bounded rationality limits our ability to design—be it from our limited knowledge, computational capacity, or information storage limits. While Rittel looked to the operational aspects of the mind, Simon looked to the lower level scientific operations of the brain and its capacity to operate with awareness—the “here and now” (p252)—and our ability to synthesize an accumulation of information and apply “discrete criteria and constraints” (p251).

While the differences in approaches are stark, the problems of design diverse and vast, comparing the approaches within these papers is most interesting not in there differences but in their similarity. The authors do converge and agree around the principle of modification and iteration—an introspective writer might point out their earlier hubris and note the commonality. Indeed, the differences of the frame—nature of design, the operation of the rational mind, the operation of information processing in the brain—do not seem to deviate from the principle that learning new information and addressing design problems is uniquely positioned to result in iteration. You can see this in Rittal ideas around Type 1 and Type 2 errors, around Simon’s pointing out of the misleading criterion function and the need to overcome our bounded rationality with flexibility, and Moholy-Nagy’s integration of evaluate, re-use, and discard from the intuition of the artist-designer. Similarly, they agree that the very research of design offers avenues for further research growth; Simon’s notion of design being always tentative—itself a nod to the low level processes of the brain being yet-uncovered—Rittel’s and Moholy-Nagy’s ideas around the practicality that design offers chances for yet more scientific discovery.

Kuhn I suspect would consider the three approaches incommensurable, given the nature of the difference in scientific paradigm. I contend however that in their differences they center the principles of design and put on offer a foundation for further exploration. Sadly, I feel this has been lost in translation in the practitioner space, boxed and tilted to commercial gibberish in many cases (I find it fascinating that Moholy-Nagy in large part points this out so long ago; history ever repeating).