---
title: "Toward a Complexity Theory of Information Systems Development"
description: "In the flurry of chaos there are still requirements to deal with."
date: 2025-08-26T10:00:00-07:00
tags:
 - phd-journey
 - research
 - thoughts
---

> An ongoing publishing of the papers, memo's, and explorations I wrote in various Doctoral and PhD Seminars between 2021 and 2024. This memo dates from March 2022.

As users, we have all felt the frustration of interfaces and software systems that fail to meet our expectations for operation. Simple tasks are twisted into a nightmare, from the stray non-working button to finish the form you just spent an hour working to the oft unreadable fonts and text on our mobile phones, the varied devices and delivery of software has only continued to grow over the last decade. The pace at which new platforms emerge within corporate and consumer segments has made information system development (ISD) projects seemingly more difficult to deliver.

This is the basic problem of practice described from the onset in Toward a complexity theory of information systems development, a paper that feels as relevant today as it did when it was authored in 2006. Building software and systems has always been a complex activity, a confluence of users' demands and requirements—the problem to be solved, better known as the application domain—that needs to be constructed into a software solution—software and system development discipline. The reality—cruel joke?—is that users never stop asking for new features and that any requirement to build a system suffers from the unrealistic expectation of a static, unchanging set of user requirements and an organizations’ internal processes and politics applies not only technological aspects. This is what Xia and Lee (2004) describe within their two dimension framework regarding the measure of a ISD project's complexity—technological and organizational aspects and structural versus dynamic. This relationship between technology and organization—user whims, developer complaints, dynamic environments—are mutually interdependent and shape each other through self-reinforcing positive feedback cycles (Orlikowski, 2000; Majchrzak et al., 2001).

From a practitioner standpoint, these top-down blackbox requirement approaches to ISD are the bane of most projects as defined by the survey from Boston Consulting Group in 2004 and fundamentally at the center of Stuart Kauffman’s (1993) phrase “complexity catastrophe.” Such processes present as temporal “snapshots” leave organizations with static systems that organizations have to live with in a dynamic world, the emergence of new knowledge and processes extinguished (p.16). To manage this growing complexity within ISD, Benbya and McKelvey draw upon complexity theory and complex adaptive systems to define a seven principle co-evolutionary framework to be lead to adaptive success in ISD: (1) adaptive tension; (2) requisite complexity; (3) change rate; (4) modular design; (5) positive feedback; (6) causal intricacy; and (7) coordination rhythm (p13). The authors propose that this conceptual framework allows better adaptation to the emergence of new user requirements and the dynamic nature of IS architectures over top-down ISD architectures and requirements approaches.

Stepping back from the summary, the application of complexity within the framework is rather diverse though as a practitioner I do question some of the framework principles. Adaptive tension relies on the interdependence though the word is not used, instead favoring the description of dynamic tension created by agents seeking different outcomes that leads to co-evolution. To a large extent co-evolution leads into requisite complexity principle by explaining that static ISD architectures and designs lack the ability to evolve because they are not complex enough at the onset of the project, that they fight the dynamic, emergent, and unpredictability of future requirements and the subsequent environments defined to support them. I contest that the application of complexity theory in this principle causes me to raise an eyebrow given that non-linear interactions don’t play a more central role in the discussion. The self-organization of requirements from stakeholders has a tendency to ebb and flow dynamically and through non-linear processes in my experience, even when you take into account heterogeneous agents (e.g., project managers governing the behavior of stakeholder interactions).

Similarly, I take issue with respect to the iterative process of development, “the result of this process is an IS that responds to problems posed by its current environment, as seen by current users” (p23). This to me ignores the nature of complex adaptive systems having multiple stakeholders, those who may not be current users of the system but still exert force and feedback into the iteration of what is developed within an information system. This may be me being pedantic—the current environment could well mean all stakeholders I suppose—but given the follow up line later on the page suggesting the inclusion of diverse participants into the process, I take their approach as cherry picking from CAS to fit their argument.

The same could be said for the modular design principle, that it allows the evolution of subunits to emerge without constraints from top-down design coupling—what we sometimes in the practitioner space call the monolith. While I don’t disagree with their claim that modules allow for faster evolution or that they will create self-organization within their subunit or microcosm, to say that modularity is the only way to manage complexity is poppycock. The “little need for communication” (p24) between teams during ISD ignores that modules will interrelate with each other and with their integration environments, resulting in new emerging and changing needs and requirements. Along those lines, “the parts of many early IS were so tightly coupled that it was impossible to continually evolve…when a major change was required the system had to be discarded” (p25) I find highly suspect; tightly coupled systems continually evolve albeit at a slower pace and that need to discard a system is likely to do the emergence of new needs and feedback looks regardless of tightly coupling or modularity.

This is not to say the article doesn’t make some finer points. The principle of positive feedback loops and development spirals I find rather well done, the application of self-organizing agents creating new processes and ISD structures from the bottom up based on feedback. Utilizing Boehm’s work as the foundation for mixing complexity with ISD is fitting given the nature of spiral go-backs, which more simply put are iterating loops based on emergence of novelty during development. I think the call out to mutual interaction informing decision making outside of timing is important—citing Kalle no less, who was also an editor on this paper as it turns out—as it takes ISD into a more people-centered process as opposed to a technical orientation for ISD. I think that supports the paper’s larger conclusion around flexibility for ISD by acknowledging that complexity plays an ever-present role.

My struggle with this paper is that I find it both interesting and frustrating. It’s not that it’s still not relevant today—I still think it is—or that it doesn’t weave complexity theory into its principles well. I can’t not agree with “[systems] should be allowed to grow and adapt to emergent user requirements”. Yet the paper simply seems to me to turn away from the uncertainty that arises when dealing with the complexities of system behaviors that may fundamentally create variations that just are not foreseen when they are not emergent user requirements, and that just bothers me.

## References
Benbya, H., & McKelvey, B. 2006. Toward a complexity theory of information systems development. (E. Jacucci, O. Hanseth, & K. Lyytinen, Eds.)Information Technology & People, 19(1): 12–34.

Boehm, B. (1988), “A spiral model of software development and enhancement”, IEEE Computer, Vol. 21 No. 5, pp. 61-72.

Lyytinen, K. (1987), “Different perspectives on information systems”, ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 5-46.

Orlikowski, W.J. (2000), “Using technology and constituting structures”, Organization Science, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 404-28.